---
layout: post
title: Concurrency Control with MVCC - Read, Insert, Remove
---

As I mentioned on the previous post, my first project will be an implementation of the MVCC mechanism for concurrency control. The algorithm implemented will be based on the [paper](https://db.in.tum.de/~muehlbau/papers/mvcc.pdf) by Thomas Neumann (SIGMOD 2015). Of course, this is my interpretation of the mechanisms proposed, it is quite possible that there are things that could be implemented better (feel free to send me feedback).

All the code for this project will be available [here](https://github.com/Manerone/transactional_map).

# Introduction

I think the first thing to think about is what is Concurrency Control and why does it matter? Let's go through this using an example.\

<!-- Think of easy to understand example where concurrency control is important, something we use on our daily lives -->

To avoid this kind of situation it is necessary that some kind of arbitration mechanism is used. In the world of databases this mechanism is known as Concurrency Control (or CC), and here is where Multi Version Concurrency Control enters the party.

I would say the most important part of MVCC is how it defines if something is visible for a transaction. The "mantra" is basically this, given an `item` and a transaction `T`:

```
    NOT item.has_parent() OR
    item.parent.timestamp < Txn.start_timestamp OR
    item.parent.timestamp == Txn.id
```

Which in english would read something like, a transaction can only access this item if:
- the parent doesn't exist OR
- the timestamp of the parent is smaller than when the transaction started OR
- the timestamp of the parent is equal to the transaction ID

An even simpler version: a transaction can only read data that existed before it started, or that it modified.

# Operations

MVCC has a couple of basic operations (read, write, commit, rollback) which we will look into today.


All the best, and hope to see you soon!
